Chapter 1

CHAPTER 1

RELATIONSHIPS ARE THE MEDIA IN WHICH VALUE IS TRANSACTED

People want things from other people. This is why other people represent both a potential solution and a potential problem. They are a potential solution when they have the things we want and are willing to give them to us. On the other hand, they are a potential problem when they don’t have the things we want – or when they do have them but won’t give them to us. And it’s far from straightforward to determine which people are which – which is why other people are typically a problem until they prove otherwise.

Across cultures and throughout history, people have devised three general approaches to the problem of others.⁠1 Some choose to move against others. This involves taking what they want from other people using force, skill, or guile in conquest or competition. Others choose to move away from others. This involves eliminating the inner desire for things or the interpersonal dependence that makes it necessary to deal with people. Both of these approaches are essentially antisocial – albeit for different reasons.

However, the most common approach that people have adopted to address the problem of others is to move toward them. From the hunting parties of our ancient ancestors to the multinational alliances of the present day, people have found ways of getting what they want by joining into larger units. And they have discovered that the most effective way to entice others to join them is to give – or promise to give in the future – something these other people want in return. This is, by definition, a prosocial solution, as it creates the basis of society.

Now, these terms can trip people up. Because of the language involved, many believe that anything prosocial must be good, and anything antisocial must be bad. For instance, the word prosocial can conjure images of people working together in harmony toward a common goal. And while this can happen, the reality is rarely that simple – and it’s easy to understand why. People typically don’t join together because they want the same things. If you want what I want, how could I possibly give it to you? If I had it to give, I wouldn’t want it from you. Keep in mind that to want has a double meaning: it can mean both to desire and to lack. This is why people who want the same things are generally useless to each other: each lacks what the other desires.

In most cases, people come together because they want different things. This is true even if they are aligned in terms of their superordinate goal, since a judicious complementarity of skills and resources significantly increases the likelihood that they will achieve their goal. If I have what you want, and you have what I want, then we have grounds for moving toward each other. And if we exchange the things we respectively want, then we enter into a relationship. And this explains – all by itself – why certain people are rich in relationship opportunities and others are not. It is neither the good nor the loving nor the virtuous who are desired for relationships, but the people whom others want things from. The person who has more of what other people want most will have more and better relationship opportunities than the person who has less. This is just the way it is.

A relationship is the medium in which value is transacted. Where value is transacted, a relationship exists. Conversely, where no value is transacted, no relationship exists. This is because people don’t move toward others whom they want nothing to do with. Rather, they approach those from whom they hope to derive some benefit. When they do not hope to benefit, people will sometimes avoid others from whom they fear harm, but most of the time, they will simply do nothing. Most individuals do not walk around with either desire and admiration or fear and animosity toward other human beings: instead, they feel indifferent. And it’s this neutrality that functionally stops them from rushing toward, or running away from, every person they happen to see. In general, people feel relatively disinterested until they perceive that someone has something they want: either to acquire or to avoid.

Anything that can be bought or earned can be transacted, and these transacted goods are what motivate people to form relationships. On the other hand, anything that can neither be bought nor earned – gifts that are given solely at the pleasure of the giver (and for which no reciprocity is expected) – cannot be transacted, and therefore do not form the basis of relationships. This is because relationships require exchange, and unilateral transactions don’t meet the criteria. For instance, we wouldn’t say that a fan is in a relationship with her idol any more than we would say a victim is in a relationship with his mugger. Relationships must go both ways.

In order for a relationship to exist, value must be transacted: it must be exchanged between the parties involved. However, this is no simple task, as value is neither static nor objective. As we’ll see, it exists solely in the mind of the valuer, and it is subject to constant fluctuation as new information emerges and circumstances evolve. What’s more, this valuation typically occurs beneath the threshold of awareness. This means that neither party can ever know the other’s true valuation of a specific good (which exists in the inaccessible privacy of the other’s mind), and also that each party typically doesn’t entirely know his or her own valuation of the good in question. And to make matters even more complicated, people generally attempt to exchange unequal (i.e., different) goods in relationships, which further increases the likelihood that the goods will have unequal (i.e., different) valuations.

That said, these valuations must be comparable. People do not willingly exchange something they value highly for something they do not. This means that if the subjective valuations of the goods in question are too far off, then no exchange occurs (and no relationship is formed). In order to effect a transaction, that which is given must be valued similarly to that which is received. As a result, we can refine our definition of relationships even further to be the media in which unequal goods of comparable value are exchanged.

Since these values are both unequal and subjective, relationships must be negotiated – not just at their inception but through their entire duration, as well. The overtness of this process depends on the nature of the relationship. For instance, in a professional relationship, the terms of the transaction are expected to be rigidly and explicitly defined. On the other hand, adopting this approach in relations with friends and lovers would feel inappropriate and off-putting. Different types of relationships must be negotiated differently.

That said, this does not mean that these types of relationships are not predicated on the transaction of value. People do not hang out with (or sleep with) those they want nothing to do with. Without exception, people want something – they hope to benefit – from the people they choose to spend their time with, even if that something is merely the pleasure of the others’ company (or an escape from the guilt associated with not discharging a duty). What this means is that the transaction of value in such relationships is typically negotiated covertly: it must be approached with subtlety, tact, and indirectness. When people take issue with my model of relationships, it is often because discussing their nature so explicitly violates a tacit social convention that friendships and romantic relationships more or less “just happen” and are maintained through altruistic “good will” (and also because the explicitness potentially reveals people’s own self-interest where they would least like to encounter it).

There are rules and laws to relationships. Rules are more culturally informed and can be broken (though often not without interpersonal consequence). For instance, as a general rule, people expect their friends not to talk badly about them behind their backs. Obviously, some people violate this rule (so it can be broken); however, awareness of this violation can lead to conflict or the end of the friendship (so it can’t always be broken without interpersonal consequence). Relationship rules can vary significantly from place to place and throughout time.

On the other hand, laws are more biologically determined and are much more difficult to break (and generally not without intrapersonal consequence). For example, it is a law that relationships are formed when people transact unequal goods of comparable value. If the goods are the same, then exchange is either unnecessary or impossible (so no relationship is formed). And if their values are too disparate, then the relationship becomes likely in inverse proportion to the size of the perceived mismatch in value: the greater the mismatch, the less likely the relationship. If the law is violated and a relationship is formed under a significantly mismatched valuation, this is generally due to the fact that the perception of value has shifted since the point of transaction. In any case, awareness of this violation can lead to a great deal of pain and distress for the under-compensated party (so it can’t always be broken without intrapersonal consequence). Relationship laws are fairly constant and universal.

These relationship rules and laws, in conjunction with people’s infinitely varied interpersonal objectives, collectively give rise to the game of relationships. Some people object to the word game used in this context; however, this is generally on the basis of the word’s connotation. A game is not necessarily a casual thing: some games are played very seriously. And a game is not necessarily a trivial thing: some games are played for very high stakes. A game is anything with rules and a goal. And under this definition, human relationships are games. In relationships, people try to get what they want from others: this is the goal. And they have to go about doing this without violating – or, more realistically, selectively violating – various inter- and intrapersonal guidelines: these are the rules. If people get too little of what they want (or too much of what they don’t want), they stop playing – which, incidentally, is another relationship law.

Every type of relationship constitutes a different game – as does every specific relationship of the same type. For instance, the game of friendship is different from the game of business, both in their rules and goals. What is considered an effective strategy in one game might constitute a rule violation in another. Furthermore, the game of friendship with a specific individual is different from the game of friendship with any other individual. After all, people don’t want the exact same set of things from all their friends, and idiosyncratic patterns of interaction will emerge within the context of each friendship. So both the rules and the goals will vary from friendship to friendship. And since each specific friendship is nested in the larger game of general friendship, we find that the overarching category contains enormous variation at the individual level.

This is all to say that it’s fairly difficult to talk about relationships. Any principle that seems to apply to the general category of relationship will likely be contradicted by a specific example on the individual level. However, we all recognize that different relationship categories exist: a friend is different from a lover is different from a colleague. And this means that there must be principles that vary from category to category but are consistent within each category itself. That said, the truer these principles are, the more abstract and unsatisfying they are likely to be. For instance, the statement “all people want to be happy” might be true in general, but it is useless in particular. Why? Because what makes one person happy will infuriate (or bore or terrify) another.

So we need to pick our poison. On the one hand, greater specificity at the category level will make any claim less valid and reliable because it will increase the likelihood that it is contradicted at the individual level. On the other hand, less specificity at the category level will make any claim less practical and actionable because it will decrease the likelihood that it can be effectively applied at the individual level. This is why the highest wisdom can often sound so vague and idiotic, while detailed advice can be so contentious and inapplicable. There are no perfect solutions here. My goal is to split the difference as best I can by providing insights that are as true as possible without compromising their usefulness.

This book is largely a discussion of the principles that govern a specific category of human relationships, namely: sexual relationships between men and women.⁠2 A sexual relationship exists whenever at least one of the goods transacted is sex. This means that when people have sex with each other, those individuals are in a sexual relationship (irrespective of whether they believe they are “in a relationship”). The duration of the relationship is unimportant: some sexual relationships last for an evening, others for a lifetime. It is also irrelevant whether sex is understood to be the ultimate objective of the relationship (i.e., the goal) or an instrument to achieve some other end (i.e., the means). What matters is the presence of sex: it is the necessary and sufficient element of a sexual relationship.

People enter into (and remain in) sexual relationships by playing the game of mating and dating. Like those pertaining to all other relationships, this game is subject to rules and laws that are culturally informed and biologically determined. Ignorance of the principles governing play is associated with a diminished likelihood of success. After all, if you don’t know the rules of a game, you can probably only win through sheer dumb luck. On the other hand, awareness of these principles will significantly improve the probability of securing one’s desired outcome. This is especially true considering that most people either don’t understand or are (at best) only dimly aware of the game they are playing.

For instance, the most fundamental law of the game of mating and dating – the law that explains the lion’s share of the variance behind who gets (and stays) with whom – is that people enter into (and remain in) sexual relationships with their perceived best options. The idea that – all other things being equal – individuals will forgo a better opportunity for a worse one is absurd. If humans were governed by this law, our species might have gone extinct ages ago. And if people enter into (and remain in) sexual relationships with their perceived best options, then the perception of value must be the mechanism that lies at the heart of sexual relationships.

Once we appreciate this, we can understand that the game of mating and dating is fundamentally governed by a synthesis of psychological and economic principles. This synthesis is partly psychological because it is informed by perception (which is a complex cognitive phenomenon), and it is partly economic because it is enacted according to principles regulating value exchange (which constitute economic action).⁠3 We can refer to this interdisciplinary framework as behavioral economics, which is why I call my theory the economic model of relationships. As we’ll see, when applied to sexual relationships, the economic model can explain a great deal of people’s mating and dating decisions using only a few underlying assumptions.

In all likelihood, this model will significantly deviate from your own subjective experience with respect to how you go about pursuing relationships. This is because most people enter into relationships for emotional reasons. Taken at face value, this is a contradiction in terms (i.e., emotion isn’t rational). However, at a much deeper level, there is some truth in this phraseology. In fact, the economic model clarifies the reasons behind the emotions that motivate people to form relationships. And since the model can explain emotions (but emotions cannot explain the model), this means that the model is more fundamentally true and should take precedence.

To understand why this is the case, we need to take a closer look at the concept of value: what it is and how it operates.

The covert calculator⁠4

Value is easy to define but difficult to pin down. Our everyday use of the word suggests a serviceable enough definition: value is something that people are willing to pay for. And payment, in turn, is the expenditure of resources. This does not necessarily mean money (though it certainly can). Time, effort, attention, and opportunity (among others) are all forms of resources. These resources must be expended both to acquire and to retain valuable goods, and resources – once expended – cannot be refunded.⁠5

Any given individual possesses these resources in limited quantities. No one has infinite money, unlimited time, or inexhaustible energy. This means that people have to make decisions about how they allocate their limited resources most effectively. They can’t have everything, and pursuing some paths will close off others. At the most basic level, the scarcity produced by our limited resources is what creates value to the individuals involved. This is essentially why the gods in Greek mythology envied man: mortality (i.e., scarce time) made his life valuable.

However, this definition doesn’t explain why people value certain goods (and not others), nor does it clarify how people determine the value of these goods. The answers to these questions are fairly complex, but let’s take a stab at them anyway. As previously stated, it’s important to appreciate that value is never static. Just like a stock in an exchange, it is subject to perpetual fluctuation. What’s more, value is never objective. As we’ll see, it only exists in the minds of the valuers. Even the “objective” market price of a certain stock is really just an aggregate of countless subjective valuations. And this, of course, is what allows some individuals to determine that this aggregate valuation is wrong: they might think the aggregate is too high (and sell short) or too low (and buy more). Objective reality, on the other hand, can’t be wrong (or right, for that matter): it simply is what it is. In any case, the determination as to whether something is “worth it” is always personal and subjective: the same price will be a steal to one person and highway robbery to another (or to the same person at different points in time).

There are two primary drivers of value fluctuation at the individual level: goal-relevance and information. People want lots of different goods, and – to the extent that the acquisition of these goods is governed by rules – that means that people are playing lots of different games simultaneously. In fact, the human experience means being embedded in a complex and interrelated set of nested games. The game of, say, making a presentation is embedded in the game of a job, which is embedded in the game of money, which is embedded in the game of society, which is embedded in the game of survival. Which game is most personally relevant at any one time depends on the never-ending stream of information that enters into our consciousness through our changing perception of the present moment.

For instance, perceiving a look of disapproval on your manager’s face might motivate you to temporarily prioritize the game of your job over and above the game of your presentation. After all, you’re likely not making a presentation because you find presenting intrinsically rewarding but because you understand that it is one of your professional responsibilities. So there would be little point in securing a lesser goal if it meant compromising a greater one (perfectionists: take note). By the same token, if you perceived that the building was on fire, you would likely try to escape using every available method – the disapproval of your manager notwithstanding.

The upshot is that nesting games will always take precedence over nested games whenever we become aware of new information that affects the acquisition (or maintenance) of the superordinate game. And it’s this fluctuation in goal-relevance caused by new information that functionally explains why people value certain goods (and not others). This is because the more we perceive a specific good to be instrumental to achieving a personally relevant goal, and the higher we understand that goal to be in our nested hierarchy of games, the more we invest that specific good with value. People might scoff at paying ten dollars for a bottle of water – but a man dying of thirst would be willing to pay a great deal more. But he will likely not be willing to pay as much for a second bottle, as the new information provided by his body will tell him that his need is now not quite so great and urgent. The water is valued differently by different people (and by the same person at different times) because it is not perceived to be equally instrumental in achieving a personally relevant goal associated with an equally important game.

Okay – so how do people determine the value of any specific good at any given time? We’ve already touched on a few factors that influence this determination: the scarcity of the specific good, the perception of its instrumentality in achieving a personally relevant goal, and the importance of that goal in the nested hierarchy of games (among others). However, the valuation process is far more complicated in reality. This is because value is essentially the output of an extremely complex calculation comprised of a countless number of evaluations mediated by perception, memory, and imagination. This output is also calculated anew hundreds of times every second for an uncountable number of goods simultaneously. I’ll try my best to explain what this means.

Once we become aware of new information that indicates a specific good might be instrumental in achieving a personally relevant goal, we begin to evaluate a great number of factors, including: the extent to which current conditions match previous conditions associated with an opportunity to acquire the good, the various ways we could go about obtaining that good, the anticipated costs (in terms of expended resources) associated with each method, the subjective value of these resources given their respective scarcity, the perceived likelihood of each method’s success, the previous success rate of each individual method, and the degree to which (and for how long) successfully obtaining the good would achieve the personally relevant goal. We execute these evaluations using many different cognitive processes that utilize information from the present and the subjective past (e.g., perception, memory) to predict an outcome in the subjective future (e.g., imagination). Finally, all these evaluations are conducted for all the most relevant goods that we could acquire using a comparable amount of resources. So far, so good?

Now, all these evaluations influence valuation in constant and predictable ways. For instance, people will value a method of obtaining a specific good with a higher likelihood of success more than they would value a method with a lower likelihood of success. This tendency is universal: there is no culture in which it doesn’t exist. This is because the principles of valuation are like the principles of logic: they do not change from place to place or moment to moment. What’s more, neither can be empirically proven: we just somehow perceive them to be self-evidently true. And this is almost certainly because – like the ability to think logically – the ability to calculate value is hardwired into our brains. This, of course, doesn’t mean that everyone always uses these abilities correctly. People can (and do) make mistakes in employing propositional logic. It just means that the same fundamental principles inherently exist within all of us – irrespective of our individual skill in applying them.

So why is this so complicated? Why don’t people, say, simply choose the method of obtaining a specific good associated with the highest likelihood of success in all cases? For the “simple” reason that – in the real world – all other things are not equal. Like a physics textbook that instructs its readers to ignore friction and air resistance, considering all other factors to be equal is a thought exercise designed to help people understand how a single component operates within a complex, interdependent system. It doesn’t generalize to reality. That said, if we could somehow understand how every component operated – both individually and interdependently – in a given system, then we might be able to create a model capable of increasingly approximating reality.⁠6 And while we might not be able to explicate every one of these components consciously, the covert calculator that exists within all of us doesn’t require our understanding to operate. It goes about its calculations intuitively and unconsciously – whether we want it to or not.

It does this by assigning a provisional value to each individual component of the calculation, ascribing a provisional weight to the value of each individual component depending on the relevance of the component to the goal in question (and the relative position of that goal in the nested hierarchy of games), and aggregating them into a provisional total value.⁠7 We can call this output the value coefficient of a particular good. It represents how valuable an individual perceives a specific good to be at a distinct moment in time. The higher the value of a coefficient associated with a specific good, the more valuable a particular individual will perceive that good to be. This value coefficient is then compared with the value coefficients of all the most relevant goods that could be acquired using a comparable amount of resources. All other things being equal, people will choose to invest these resources in the particular good associated with the highest relative value coefficient. And the difference between any two value coefficients will not only indicate a given individual’s preference but the relative size of that preference, as well.

This is how people determine the value of something. The issue is that almost no one experiences the determination of value in this way. When presented like this, the valuation process feels alien or robotic or sociopathic. This is because the vast majority of this process occurs well below the threshold of awareness: individuals are generally cognizant of only a few aspects of the calculation, at best. And this can be off-putting, as it suggests not only that people are not aware of why they value the things they do but that their valuations might be influenced without their knowledge, as well. Both are true. However, if you pop the hood and look inside, you’ll see that the brain is one enormously complicated organic computer. And among its most important functions – just behind keeping the body alive and rendering an accurate representation of reality – is the tireless calculation of value by means of the covert calculus I just described. This is how people actually determine the value of something – it’s just not how they experience doing so within their own subjectivity.

So why is there a mismatch between the actual process of valuation and the experience of that process? Simple: under normal conditions, conscious awareness has a very limited bandwidth. Awareness of the actual process of valuation – and the billions and billions of calculations per second that this process entails – would be absolutely overwhelming. It would paralyze the individual in question, which would be a significant liability for an organism that has to move through reality. Even bringing a greater proportion of the process into conscious awareness would likely lead to behavioral hesitation, which would have consequences for time-sensitive decisions (including those that impact survival). So the mind effectively hides this process so deep in the unconscious that, much like the routines governing an individual’s heartbeat, it can only be partially accessed with an inordinate amount of conscious effort.

That said, while awareness of the process itself is unnecessary (or even detrimental) to the individual, awareness of the output of the process is extremely important. So the question becomes: How can people be meaningfully made aware of the output of a process of which they must remain functionally ignorant? The mind has evolved an ingenious solution to this problem, namely: the calculated value coefficient is transformed into an emotion. This emotion contains the personally relevant significance of the value coefficient, and it transmits this significance in a manner that (typically) prevents individuals from being overwhelmed with unnecessary information and can motivate them into immediate action.

This is why no one thinks, “I’ve determined that a particular good would be greatly instrumental in helping me achieve an important self-relevant goal: not only because I anticipate that the benefits associated with acquiring it will significantly exceed the costs, but because I can also conceive of no better way of achieving the same goal to the same extent with a different good that could be acquired with comparable resources at an equivalent cost-benefit ratio.” Instead, they feel: “I need this,” or “This is the one,” or “Wow! I love that!” The feelings behind these statements accomplish the same goal more elegantly than awareness of the valuation process ever could: they communicate to the individual (and potentially to others) that a particular good is subjectively valuable. And this communication is extremely useful because it is constituted by behavioral impulses that motivate action in alignment with this valuation: to approach, to acquire, to protect, to maintain.

So people do make decisions for emotional reasons. That is, the covert calculus of the valuation process provides the rationale for the emotion that motivates decisive action. Neat! And to the extent that it’s true, this explanation can also help us understand a number of other potentially puzzling phenomena. For instance, it clarifies why feelings often seem to come out of nowhere. They don’t really: they are the transmuted outcomes of the valuation process. It’s simply because the process is normally so deeply unconscious that we experience the emotions as sort of arising within us. In the absence of a better understanding, we’ve even created a mysterious organ to help explain the origin of these feelings: the heart. When people talk about the heart in this context, they generally don’t mean the electromechanical pump that circulates blood throughout the body, but a hypothesized seat of emotion capable of sensitively responding to environmental cues. And, of course, people do have hearts in this sense: they’re just not where they think they are.

I could say much more about this topic; however, I’m probably already pushing my luck here. So let’s abandon this disquisition in favor of less rarefied realms. I promise the remainder of the book will be easier to read.

The game of games

Applying the concept of value to human beings – and the relationships they form – can be unsettling and contentious. It’s unsettling because we would prefer not to think that some people are more valuable than others, and it’s contentious because we tend to disagree about what might contribute to those differences in value. However, we can largely avoid both issues by remembering that value is always assessed in relation to a personally relevant goal.

For instance, a plumber is neither inherently more nor less valuable than a cardiologist. However, if your toilet backs up, you’ll be calling one and not the other. This decision is not unsettling – it’s common sense. So to understand why individuals enter into relationships with certain people (and not others), it is extremely useful to identify the goal they are attempting to achieve. This is equivalent to asking the question: What problem of living are they attempting to solve? Fortunately, the bi-directional relationship between problem and solution helps us answer this question. That is, because your toilet is clogged, I can predict that you’ll call a plumber (and not a cardiologist) – and because you called a plumber, I can deduce that you had an issue with your plumbing (and not your heart).

This personally relevant goal organically renders certain traits, skills, and attributes more valuable than others. For example, while we all might not agree on what makes for an ideal plumber, we can reasonably predict that we will tend to value signals of responsiveness, effectiveness, and affordability in a potential candidate more heavily than, say, signals of kindness, temperance, and humor, if and when we need to hire one. This decision is not unsettling – it’s common sense. It’s also important to appreciate that in most cases the traits, skills, and attributes we value more highly in those with whom we enter into relationships to solve a particular problem of living are much more influenced by the nature of the goal in question than by personal preference. This is because the value of a good is directly related to its perceived instrumentality in achieving a specific goal. If anything, it’s probably more correct to think of our preference as the consequence of that perception (as opposed to the other way around).

Whether we’re aware of it or not, we also seem to possess exemplars – or idealized constructs – associated with specific types of relationship partners. And since thoroughly examining each individual candidate for a relationship can be both time-consuming and prohibitively expensive, one of our most common decision-making heuristics is to (often unconsciously) determine the perceived goodness of fit between any specific candidate and its relevant exemplar. The greater the perceived fit, the more likely we will select a given option, all other things being equal.

What’s more, this process is influenced by contextual factors in predictable ways. For example, the less important the goal a given relationship will attempt to achieve in an individual’s nested hierarchy of games, the lower this individual’s selection threshold will be with respect to the perceived goodness of fit. That is, for a less important decision, we’re more likely to consider a decent match to be “good enough.” However, for a more important decision, we would likely hold off until we found a “better” option (provided we weren’t under an urgent time constraint).

To understand why individuals enter into relationships with certain people (and not others), it is extremely useful to identify the exemplars against which they are comparing candidates. Fortunately, the bi-directional relationship between exemplars and selection helps us in this process. That is, because I know your exemplar, I can predict that you’ll choose to enter into a relationship with a specific person (and not another) to achieve a specific goal. And because you’ve chosen to enter into a relationship with a certain individual to achieve a specific goal, I can deduce the features of your exemplar (with sufficient data).

When we apply all these considerations to sexual relationships, it’s easy to see why the game of mating and dating can be so confusing. In the first place, it’s important to understand that – for the vast majority of people – this game is very high in the nested hierarchy of games. As the saying goes, “All’s fair in love and war.” To the extent that this is true, it is true because both of those games are fundamentally concerned about survival. And we generally expect the game of survival to take precedence over all other games for the simple reason that losing that game typically makes it impossible to win the others.

While the “game of war” is associated with the survival of the individual organism, the “game of love” is associated with the survival of the individual’s genes. From an evolutionary standpoint, an organism that lives to a ripe, old age without reproducing not only dies – it goes extinct. At some level, it lost the game of survival because it did not find a way to perpetuate itself through time. Indeed, it seems that genetic survival is a more important goal than individual survival for perhaps all living beings (including humans). A mother who dies so her children might live exemplifies this phenomenon. Just as humans have evolved biological and psychological mechanisms to facilitate their own individual survival, they have evolved other mechanisms to assist with the survival of their genes.

As a consequence, the game of mating and dating ranks very highly in most people’s nested hierarchy of games – in many cases, above their own individual survival. In many respects, it is the game of games: the game that makes all other games possible. This explains a number of things. For example, if the game of mating and dating is associated with the most superordinate goal of all (i.e., genetic survival), then we should not only expect a constant, passive surveillance for new information pertaining to that goal but also a willingness to prioritize this goal over all others when sufficiently attractive opportunities present themselves. This is why the sexual marketplace is functionally everywhere, and why people are subject to doing all kinds of hurtful, shameful, and desperate things in the service of this goal. A starving person is likely not proud of choosing to steal food – and we probably wouldn’t uphold the behavior as an exemplar for ethical conduct – but we would almost certainly understand this person’s decision.

Since the value of a good is related to its perceived instrumentality in achieving a particular goal and to how highly that goal is ranked in an individual’s nested hierarchy of games, we can now appreciate why those with whom we enter into sexual relationships can be among the most valuable people in our lives – and why that value can fluctuate so dramatically over the course of a relationship. After all, a plumber is much more valuable to us before he fixes our clog than he is after he does so. People might balk at this, but no one continues to pay the plumber after the job is finished.

Though potentially challenging (and frustrating), the changing priority of our goals – and, therefore, the fluctuating value of any given person for a particular relationship over time – might be navigable were it not for two additional variables that significantly complicate the matter further, namely: goal conflation and lack of awareness. Let’s look at each in turn.

It can be hard enough to get what you want from a specific person. However, this process becomes exponentially more difficult if you want many different things from that specific person. We can call this goal conflation, which occurs when a single means (i.e., a specific relationship) is used to pursue multiple goals (e.g., sex, security, friendship) simultaneously. Goal conflation makes every aspect of a relationship more challenging because completely satisfying options will be both rare and expensive.

As a result, most people will not be able to get everything they want from a single person. And this means – when it comes to relationships – there aren’t any solutions, only trade-offs. And this system of trade-offs becomes increasingly more complicated in direct proportion to the number of things we want from any given person. Not only will the things we want fluctuate in importance over time, but they will fluctuate differentially, as well. This will alter the relative priority of what we want from any particular person, and this, in turn, will affect how much we value that person by influencing our perception of the trade-offs involved.

Let’s say a given woman might not be the most beautiful, but she may be very good with children. This trade-off will not only cause different men to value the same woman differently, but it will cause the same man to value the same woman differently at different points in time. A husband who was willing to forgo an attractive sexual opportunity for the sake of a woman’s maternal instincts will likely be less willing to do so once his children are grown up. This is because – if nothing else changes – the same woman will have become less valuable to him. This is not only because the woman can no longer help him achieve one of his personally relevant goals (i.e., raising children) but also because this goal is no longer highly ranked (for having been achieved). The cruel reality is that she will have become less valuable to him for having given him what he wanted. Remember: no one continues to pay the plumber. In light of this, we can understand why staying together over a lifetime can be such a difficult task – and why relationship longevity is so closely related to responding effectively to the way certain trade-offs evolve over time as a result of goal conflation.

That said, the man in the previous paragraph likely would not have consciously formulated his situation in those terms. And this brings us to the second significant complicator: lack of awareness. As you’ll recall, most of the valuation process is buried in the unconscious most of the time. What’s more, the individual is generally only made aware of the outcome of this process when the value coefficient is transmuted into an emotion. And with respect to sexual relationships, the emotion into which this value coefficient is transmuted is desire. The more a particular person is perceived to be valuable – that is, the more this person is perceived to be capable of achieving more of an individual’s most highly ranked personally relevant goals as prioritized in that specific moment – the more this particular person will be desired by the individual in question.

This is the true (though, perhaps, unsatisfying) definition of a high-value man (or woman): it is a person we perceive as being able to give us more of what is most important to us, given the current prioritization of our goals. What’s more, this person’s ability to give us more of what is most important to us should not be compromised by any significant liabilities that would negate the benefits we hope to accrue in a relationship with him (or her). That is, a high-value person also gives us less of what we don’t want.

When both of these are true, then the individual is perceived to be a net positive in the context of our hyperconflated goal set. The bigger the net positive, the higher the person’s perceived value and the more desire we experience. Of course, whether we act on the impulses that constitute that desire (e.g., to approach, to acquire, to protect) depends on a host of other factors (e.g., perceived availability, intrasexual competition, available resources). However, we can’t help but feel desire as a consequence of that perception. From this perspective, we can understand that saying people desire a high-value individual is a tautology, as desire is the natural emotional response to the perception of high value. It’s equivalent to saying that people desire a desirable individual. And this is because value and desire are the same thing experienced in different ways.

As a result, our hypothetical husband probably wouldn’t think of his wife as less valuable to him because she now provides less of what he wants (and, potentially, more of what he doesn’t want) in the context of his evolving, hyperconflated goal set for the relationship, which thereby renders his marriage increasingly expensive (especially in the context of an optionality that may include more “affordable” alternatives) over time. And if he does think this way, he will likely feel guilty for doing so, as this type of thinking violates a tacit social convention with respect to sexual relationships.

It’s much more likely that our hypothetical husband will respond to his circumstances by feeling less attracted to his wife. The diminishment of his desire is the result of his (potentially unconscious) perception that his wife has become less valuable to him, given his personally relevant goals. He may feel confused or frustrated or embarrassed in response to this diminishment, but – to the extent that desire represents the transmuted perception of value in sexual relationships – he won’t be able to prevent it. That said, he may attempt to avoid experiencing this change in his desire in a variety of ways (e.g., drinking more, avoiding his wife, devoting more time to his work) with varying degrees of success.

In the context of sexual relationships, our emotional response to the perception of a high-value individual is desire. And this feeling motivates us to initiate (or maintain) a relationship with the individual in question. On the other hand, our emotional response to the perception of a low-value individual (i.e., someone we perceive to be a net negative in the context of our hyperconflated goal set) is disgust. And this feeling motivates us to avoid (or escape) a relationship with the individual in question. Finally, our emotional response to the perception of a mid-value individual (i.e., someone we perceive to be net neutral in the context of our hyperconflated goal set) depends on the number and intensity of the benefits and liabilities involved. If we perceive that a person might be capable of giving us a few things we kinda want (and a few things we kinda don’t), we typically feel indifferent. We could take or leave the opportunity this person represents. However, if we perceive that a person might be able to give us a lot of what we really want (and a lot of what we really don’t), then we typically feel conflicted. And this is because both our desire and our disgust are active at the same time.⁠8 That is, we feel powerfully drawn to and repulsed by the same individual simultaneously. This is called an approach-avoidance conflict, and it can trap people in agonizing indecision for years.

Incidentally, the foregoing also helps explain why people ignore red flags – at least, in otherwise attractive individuals. Red flags are traits or behaviors that signify that a liability that is not (or only marginally) present now might be present (or much more present) in the future. The issue is that – just as the same benefit is always more valuable in the present than in the future – the same liability is always less detrimental in the future than in the present. This is because a chance always exists that neither the future benefit nor the future liability will actually come to pass, which influences the weighting of the value of each in proportion to the likelihood of its obtaining. This causes people to (rationally) undervalue potential future liabilities, which then contributes to tipping their perception of any given individual in the direction of a net positive.

When people perceive someone to have many of the goods they most want (right now), and few of the goods they don’t want (right now) – that is, when they’re dealing with an apparently high-value individual – then they will feel a great deal of desire for this person (right now). And this positive emotion will reciprocally influence their valuation process in predictable ways, namely: by weighting values associated with current benefits more heavily, and weighting values associated with future liabilities more lightly. This is in the service of motivating action in alignment with their valuations. Given this feedback loop, it can take a fair amount of wisdom and forbearance to resist being emotionally swept away in the face of an extremely attractive option – virtues that are generally only cultivated as a consequence of the pain associated with not resisting such an impulse in the past.

On the other hand, people are typically better able to keep their wits about them when dealing with less obviously attractive individuals. Since they perceive these people to have fewer of the goods they most want, their valuation isn’t quite so positive, even in the apparent absence of liabilities. This causes them to experience less desire, which mitigates the process described earlier. Ultimately, it is this reciprocal relationship between the perception of value and desire that explains why attractive people tend to receive all kinds of allowances that less attractive people don’t – including the tendency to discount or minimize the implications of their bad behavior.

When models fail

While there are many ways in which a lack of awareness significantly complicates the pursuit and maintenance of sexual relationships, I’d like to discuss one final consideration that will be particularly relevant to our subsequent discussions. It is this: if the process of determining value is comprised of a countless number of individual evaluations, each associated with a specific weight that attempts to predict the importance of that evaluation to the achievement of a particular goal, and if the valuation process is almost entirely unconscious, then (to a large extent) people will be unaware of precisely what they value and the extent to which they value those things.

For instance, a woman who consciously thinks she wants a nice man to settle down with but who constantly finds herself getting involved in short-term relationships with exploitative bad boys is completely in the dark with respect to her actual goals and values, which are revealed by examining her choices. Such a woman might even vigorously deny that she has “a type,” so profound the lack of awareness of her own preferences might be. This is hardly unusual.

Furthermore, irrespective of how progressive and open-minded we collectively consider ourselves to be, certain goals and values will always remain socially unacceptable. This means that even if we were aware of our valuation process, we would likely try to hide aspects of that process from others (and even ourselves). As a result, it is generally useless to directly ask people what they want in a sexual partner. Even if they could tell you the whole story (and they can’t), they wouldn’t. This is due to the fact that sharing some parts of that story would result in social censure and other parts might compromise the attainment of their goals. Just like a job interviewer can’t be completely transparent about the actual criteria for selection – as doing so would significantly increase the likelihood that candidates would simply tell the interviewer what she wants to hear – people are generally forced into some measure of dissimulation when trying to get what they want from the opposite sex.

The most significant consequence of the unconscious nature of the valuation process is that – while there is always a rational basis for people’s attraction (i.e., it is the transmutation of a value coefficient into an emotion) – what people are attracted to is not always rationally aligned with their best interests (or even their consciously explicated goals). This is due to the fact that – while the valuation process is inherent – the weights and evaluations used in that process are not.

People can’t help but constantly (and unconsciously) value the objects of their perception according to their personally relevant goals. This tendency is baked into our neurobiology and might only be surmountable through enlightenment-level self-awareness and self-control. On the other hand, what people value – and how much they value those things – is not entirely biologically determined. It is both mediated by perception (which is not always reliable) and informed by culture (which creates significant variability across time and place).

As humans, we are born with the capacity to value, just like we are born with the capacity for language. However, precisely what we value often depends as much on the culture into which we are born as does our native language. People realize the potential inherent in both of these capacities primarily through observation of the world around them. In many respects, the brain is like a machine learning algorithm. It is hardwired with certain computational pathways, but it must be trained on data to function properly. And how accurately and efficiently such an algorithm performs its intended purpose is directly related to the data on which it is trained. These data not only constitute the inputs of the algorithm, they are also capable of altering the structure and process of the algorithm itself. These alterations can then influence the inputs of the algorithm in a reciprocal fashion. We can call the evolving outcome of this interdependent system the valuation algorithm when it is concerned with determining the instrumentality of perceived objects to our self-relevant goals.

With respect to influencing the development of the valuation algorithm for sexual relationships, the most significant culture into which people are born is their home environment. Whether they want to or not, children principally train their valuation algorithm on the data collected by observing the relationships of their primary caregivers. And while I can think of no better alternative, this is subject to creating difficulties for people further down the road for two reasons. Both are inevitable and inescapable in that they impact everyone to some extent.

The first reason is related to the quantity of our training data. If each of our valuation algorithms for sexual relationships is principally trained on data collected from just one relationship, then our algorithms will be unduly biased by the idiosyncratic features of that relationship. This is comparable to using one specific sparrow not only as the exemplar for all other sparrows but also for all other birds. Penguins, ostriches, and condors are fully just as avian as sparrows, but an algorithm trained exclusively on sparrows (let alone one specific sparrow) probably wouldn’t even recognize them as birds.

We could call this the law of small numbers as applied to relationships, and it skews our valuations irrespective of the nature of the relationships on which they were trained.
